Monocle3 trajectory analysis case study tutorial (#3610)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/scrna-case_monocle3-trajectories/tutorial.md

objectives:
- Understand which opertions to perform on AnnData object to obtain files needed for Monocle
- Follow the Monocle3 workflow and choose the right parameter values
- Compare output from Scanpy and Monocle
- Interpet trajectory analysis results

time_estimation: 1H

key_points:
- You should understand your data to be able to extract relevant information for further analysis.
- Trajectory analysis is highly dependent on the parameter values you choose, as such ‘inferred relationships’ are a bigger mathematical leap. Therefore, you should always check if the output makes biological sense before processing to the next step.
- Comparing the output of two different methods applied on the same dataset might be useful to confirm the results, ensure that the findings are reliable and even sometimes find a new piece of information.

requirements:
-
    type: "internal"
    topic_name: transcriptomics
    tutorials:
        - scrna-case_alevin
        - scrna-case_alevin-combine-datasets
        - scrna-case_basic-pipeline
        - scrna-case_JUPYTER-trajectories
tags:
- single-cell
- trajectory-analysis
- paper-replication

contributors:
- wee-snufkin

> - nomadscientist

Reviewer: If you like can use our fancy new contributions syntax to more accurately record contributions to a training material, declaring which people should be recorded for authorship or just editing.

```
contributions:
  authorship:
    - shiltemann
  editing:
    - bebatut
    - hexylena
  funding:
    - carpentries
  testing:
    - userX
  ux:
    - userY
  infrastructure:
    - userZ
```

see the [full gtn tutorial schema documentation](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/contributing/tutorials/schemas/tutorial.html) for details on the individual roles.

---

# Introduction

> This tutorial is a follow-up to the 'Single-cell RNA-seq: Case Study' (find it [here](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/transcriptomics/)), we will use the same sample from the previous tutorials. If you haven’t done them yet, it’s highly recommended that you go through them to get an idea how to [prepare a single cell matrix](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/scrna-case_alevin/tutorial.html), [combine datasets](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/scrna-case_alevin-combine-datasets/tutorial.html) or [filter, plot and process scRNA-seq data](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/scrna-case_basic-pipeline/tutorial.html) to get the data in the form we’ll be working on today.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial is a follow-up to the ['Single-cell RNA-seq: Case Study']({% link topics/transcriptomics/index.md %}), we will use the same sample from the previous tutorials. If you haven’t done them yet, it’s highly recommended that you go through them to get an idea how to [prepare a single cell matrix]({% link topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/scrna-case_alevin/tutorial.md %}), [combine datasets]({% link topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/scrna-case_alevin-combine-datasets/tutorial.md %}) or [filter, plot and process scRNA-seq data]({% link topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/scrna-case_basic-pipeline/tutorial.md %}) to get the data in the form we’ll be working on today.
```

The only link checking we do regularly is internal link checking (as external is extremely time consuming and error prone). 

By converting the tutorial links to internal links we ensure that they get checked automatically, and that if someone hosts this on their own domain, it stays on the same site.

Reviewer: You can probably bulk replace these with something like 

```
sed -i "s|(https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/\([^)]*\).html)|{% link \1.md %} path/to/tutorial.md
```

In this tutorial we will perform trajectory analysis using [monocle3](https://cole-trapnell-lab.github.io/monocle3/). You can find out more about the theory behind trajectory analysis here /slides/. We have already analysed the trajectory of our sample using ScanPy toolkit in another tutorial: [Trajectory Analysis using Python (Jupyter Notebook) in Galaxy](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/scrna-case_JUPYTER-trajectories/tutorial.html). However, trajectory analysis is quite sensitive and some methods work better for specific datasets. Now you can go through the same steps but using a different method to compare the results, usability and the final outcome! Sounds exciting, let’s dive into that! 

> {% snippet faqs/galaxy/tutorial_mode.md %}

Reviewer: :yellow_heart: i forgot we made this a snippet, so nice to recommend this !

## Get data

> We still work on data from a mouse dataset of fetal growth restriction [Bacon et al. 2018](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/scrna-JUPYTER-trajectories/tutorial.html#Bacon2018) (see the study in Single Cell Expression Atlas [here](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa/sc/experiments/E-MTAB-6945/results/tsne) and the project submission [here](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/experiments/E-MTAB-6945/)), making this case study even more comprehensive. 

Reviewer: could you copy the citation over, from that tutorial's `tutorial.bib` to this one's, and then use `{% cite Bacon2018 %}` here instead?

```suggestion
We still work on data from a mouse dataset of fetal growth restriction {% cite Bacon2018 %} (see the study in Single Cell Expression Atlas [here](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa/sc/experiments/E-MTAB-6945/results/tsne) and the project submission [here](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/experiments/E-MTAB-6945/)), making this case study even more comprehensive. 
```

also if you [could avoid 'here' as a link](https://usability.yale.edu/web-accessibility/articles/links#link-text), and maybe something like `see [the study in the Single Cell Expression Atlas]() and the [project submission](), making...`

> >
> {: .solution}
{: .question}

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Pre-processing
>
> 1. {% tool [Monocle3 preprocess](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/ebi-gxa/monocle3_preprocess/monocle3_preprocess/0.1.4+galaxy0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Input object in RDS format"*: output of **Monocle3 create** {% icon tool %}
>    - *"The dimensionality of the reduced space."*: `250`
 >
{: .hands_on}

##  Dimensionality reduction

Now it’s time for the proper dimensionality reduction so that instead of the initial thousands of dimensions, we can get only 2 and hence plot all the cells on one 2D graph. Again, there are several algorithms to do that: UMAP, tSNE, PCA and LSI (only possible when preprocess_method is set to 'LSI'), but due to the same reasons as above, we’ll use UMAP (most common + allows further operations + best results). But I’ll let you see how the output from other algorithms look to convince you that **UMAP** is indeed the best in this case. Of course it might happen that by choosing different pre-processing values, tSNE or PCA plots would look better, so don't be afriad to play around the parameters and test them!

> ![dim red](../../images/scrna-casestudy-monocle/dim_red_methods.png "Different outputs depending on the algorithm of dimentionality reduction, applied to the output of the previous step (except LSI method which was called on LSI-preprocessed data).")

Reviewer: It looks like this alt-text doesn't describe the image very well for users who are relying on a screen reader to access the content. We have a short guide on [what's appropriate for alt-text vs captions in the GTN Contributing Guide](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/contributing/tutorials/create-new-tutorial-content/tutorial.html#guidelines-on-alt-vs-figcaption-text) which has more details.

Author: I edited the alt text so that it hopefully explains more now

![pseudotime](../../images/scrna-casestudy-monocle/pseudotime.png "Trajectory analysis - pseudotime")

Once the trajectory has been inferred, you might want to return to the gene expression analysis and dive into that in more depth. Here is a powerful tool that would give you even more information about the genes. 

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Differentially expressed genes
>
> 1. {% tool [Monocle3 diffExp](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/ebi-gxa/monocle3_diffexp/monocle3_diffExp/0.1.4+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Input object in RDS format"*: output of **Monocle3 orderCells** {% icon tool %}
> 2. Rename {% icon galaxy-pencil %} the output: `Differential gene expression table`
>
{: .hands_on}

# Conclusion

> {:.no_toc}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- Follow the Monocle3 workflow and choose the right parameter values
- Compare output from Scanpy and Monocle
- Interpet trajectory analysis results

time_estimation: 1H

key_points:
- You should understand your data to be able to extract relevant information for further analysis.
- Trajectory analysis is highly dependent on the parameter values you choose, as such ‘inferred relationships’ are a bigger mathematical leap. Therefore, you should always check if the output makes biological sense before processing to the next step.
- Comparing the output of two different methods applied on the same dataset might be useful to confirm the results, ensure that the findings are reliable and even sometimes find a new piece of information.

requirements:
-
    type: "internal"
    topic_name: transcriptomics
    tutorials:
        - scrna-case_alevin
        - scrna-case_alevin-combine-datasets
        - scrna-case_basic-pipeline
        - scrna-case_JUPYTER-trajectories
tags:
- single-cell
- trajectory-analysis
- paper-replication

contributions:
  authorship:
    - wee-snufkin
  editing:
    - hexylena
    - nomadscientist
  funding:

>     - EPSRC Training Grant

Reviewer: This should be added to the `CONTRIBUTORS.yaml` file, see `erasmusplus` for a good example there

Author: Already done!
